---
title: "Hardware Thread vs Software Thread vs User-Level Thread vs Kernel-Level Thread"
toc: true
categories:
  - 
tags:
  - 
  - 
---


# Ambiguity of the term Thread
The computer has a fixed number of built-in CPU cores and threads. But how can I set the number of threads above thousands in the OS?
This ambiguity arises from two usages of the term **thread**.

# CPU thread (hardware thread) vs Software thread
The operating system sees CPU threads as individual CPU cores. There's no distinction along the lines of CPU cores 1-20 being **physical cores** and 21-40 being **logical cores** for the OS. In the past, 1-core means 1-thread, even in those days when a 1-core, 1-thread CPU was used, it was possible to launch dozens of software threads at a time.

Suppose that the CPU is N cores and M threads.  
N is literally the number of **physical** CPU core units. There are n semiconductor units that conduct <FETCH, DECODE, EXECUTE, MEMORY, WRITE>.
M is the **virtual** number of cores, and in some cases "the number of threads that can run concurrently", **CPU threads**. The most intuitive case is N=M, but sometimes M is greater than N. This means that a single physical core can run more than one thread concurrently.
It is refered to as the **simultaneous multi-threading (SMT)**. A simple basic principle is if using only one (CPU) thread, can not 100% utilize the CPU core. FYI, SMT is a bit of a scientific term, and Intel's marketing term is **hyper-threading**

However, when we refer to the thread, it usually means the **software thread**. A thread of execution is the smallest sequence of programmed instructions that can be managed independently by a OS scheduler. When the operating system does scheduling, the number of software threads that can run concurrently is M (the size of CPU threads)!! However, you can have as many **software threads** as memory (and swap area) allows, among which may sleep waiting for hardware (user input, network packets, timer interrupts, etc.). And these threads are well-known threads to software developers that have their own tasks and unique execution paths in the process.
The operating system selects of "ready-to-execute software threads" in a short period (usually a few milliseconds) and executes them simultaneously. Most Operating Systems identify a task with a **THREAD_ID** for a software thread.

## Example
Suppose that a particular task with software thread #78 could be executing the CPU thread #36 in the 18th CPU core.
Meanwhile, a particular process such as software process #24 could consist of multiple tasks, each of which has its unique software thread, are executing CPU thread #36 at one moment.
Thus, software thread #78 and process #24 is executing CPU thread #36. At the same time, they are execueting the 18th CPU core. 

# Multi-Thread(ing)?
Until now, we've take a look a the CPU thread and software thread. Then, here's the question. Which one stands for the thread in the multi-threading? Before answering this question, need to understand the concept of the **user-level thread** and **kernel-level thread**

## User-Level Thread vs Kernel-Level Thread
- **User-level threads** are what we commonly write in code during programming such as ```new Thread()``` in .NET or JVM.
- **kernel-level threads** are threads managed by the OS. It's actually the **kernel level thread** that we do context switching,
- If two **kernel-level threads** attach to a process, two out of several **user-level threads** can run.   

From this explanation, the software thread explained above is more like the kernel-level thread than the user-level thread. But the term software thread may be used for the both threads. And usually we do not put "software" in front of the thread. This was to distinguish it from the harware threads (CPU threads).


Since the multi-thread is the multiple threads running in one process, the answer is the **user-level thread**. And these multi-threaded threads should be selected by the kernel-level threads to be run.